Source: 29 CFR 1921.13
Title: § 1921.13 Decision of the hearing examiner.
Section: 1921.13
Path: PART 1921—RULES OF PRACTICE IN ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS UNDER SECTION 41 OF THE LONGSHOREMEN'S AND HARBOR WORKERS' COMPENSATION ACT
 > PART 1921—RULES OF PRACTICE IN ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS UNDER SECTION 41 OF THE LONGSHOREMEN'S AND HARBOR WORKERS' COMPENSATION ACT
 > Subpart D—Decision and Order

(a) Filing of transcript of evidence. As soon as practicable after the close of the hearing, the reporter shall transmit to the Chief Hearing Examiner the copies of the transcript of the testimony and the exhibits introduced in evidence at the hearing except such copies of the transcript and exhibits as are forwarded to the hearing examiner.
(b) Proposed findings of fact, conclusions, and orders. Within 10 days after receipt of notice that the transcript of the testimony has been filed or such additional time as the hearing examiner may allow, each party may file with the hearing examiner proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order, together with a supporting brief including the reasons for any proposals. Such proposals shall be served upon all parties, and shall contain adequate references to the record and authorities relied upon.
(c) Decision of the hearing examiner. Within a reasonable time after the termination of the time allowed for the filing of proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and orders, or after the date of submission of an agreement containing consent findings and order, the hearing examiner shall prepare his decision, which shall become the decision of the Assistant Secretary 20 days after service thereof unless exceptions are filed thereto, as provided in § 1921.14 except in cases dealt with in § 1921.8(b). Except in cases under § 1921.8(b) the decision of the hearing examiner shall include a statement of:
(1) Findings and conclusions, with reasons and bases, therefor, upon each material issue of fact, law, or discretion presented on the record, and
(2) An appropriate order.
Except in cases under § 1921.8(b), the decision of the hearing examiner shall be based upon a consideration of the whole record and supported by reliable, probative, and substantial evidence and upon the basis of the preponderance of the evidence.